# Choosing a care home 

Source: Questions to consider when choosing a care home - By Ashbrook Care Home.


## 1. Is the location of the care home easily accessible for you?

You may want to weigh up finding the right care home for you against the travel
time it takes to get there. You may find a few extra miles worthwhile if it’s a
home you are happy with.

## 2. Is there an outside space which residents can enjoy and nice views out of the windows?

The addition of an outdoor space enhances the opportunities and quality of life
of the residents. A nice view is something enjoyable for those who can’t get
outside and something all residents can enjoy during bad weather and winter
months.

## 3. What is the ratio of staff to residents?

You’re going to want to ensure the care and attention your loved one receives
meets their needs and is tailored to their specific requirements. This question
is key in assessing whether staff members have quality time to spend with
residents.

## 4. What qualifications do staff have and how are they trained?

This is a great question to ask in helping you decide if the care home will meet
the physical, emotional and medical needs of your loved one. You want to feel
comfortable and happy that the primary care givers match your requirements.

## 5. What is the turnover of staff?

Good care staff build up a rapport with their residents and really get to know
them. Longevity of staff is a sign that they are happy in their place of work
but also that there will be consistency in the day-to-day interactions of your
loved one.

## 6. Can residents choose their daily routine?

Every resident will have different needs and preferences and so having choices
in how they live shows the care home caters for individuals.

## 7. Do they employ an Activities Co-ordinator? What activities are available?

Activities are paramount to the residents’ mental, physical and emotional
well-being. In addition, find out if they offer activities that your loved one
enjoys and has a passion for.

## 8. Are there any visitor restrictions?

As care homes learn to live with COVID-19, you’ll want to know what the visitor
policy is and what that means for you.

## 9. How often do other health staff such as opticians, dentists and chiropodists visit residents?

Your loved one’s basic health needs will continue, and you will want to ensure
they will be met.

## 10. Does the care home cater for individual needs and preferences and if so, how?

You will want to choose a care home that feels like a ‘home from home’, this may
mean different things for different people and so you’ll want to find out if
they offer the things that are important to you and your loved one.
