# United Kingdom: Court of Protection

[Source: Wilson Browne Solicitors](https://www.wilsonbrowne.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/WBS-Caring-For-a-Loved-One-v1.pdf)

This information is about the United Kingdom Court of Protection and how to involve a Deputy to help your loved one.

## What is the Court of Protection? 

The Court of Protection is a specialist court that makes decisions about the
property; finances; and personal welfare of those who lack the mental capacity
to take decisions themselves.

## Do I need a Court of Protection application? 

A Court of Protection application may be required if you have a disabled child
or a loved one who has lost capacity through an accident or progressive illness.
It may also be necessary to apply to the Court of Protection if there is a
dispute which involves an incapacitated person or if you want to make gifts or
do tax planning for someone who is incapable.

## What is a Court of Protection Deputy? 

A deputy is someone appointed by the Court of Protection to deal with the
property and financial affairs of a person who lacks the mental capacity to do
so themselves. 

## What is mental capacity? 

The law presumes that everyone has the capacity to make a decision unless it can
be shown otherwise. An assessment of capacity (on form COP3) by a qualified
practitioner must accompany the deputyship application, so the court can decide
whether the person lacks capacity to make certain decisions for themselves.

## Who can be a Court of Protection Deputy? 

A deputy must be at least 18 years old. It could be a family member or a friend.
It can also be a professional person such as a lawyer. In complex cases,
particularly those involving large sums of money, the Court may prefer to
appoint a professional deputy.

## When does a Court of Protection Deputy happen? 

For those who are unable to manage their affairs, lack capacity and where no
Lasting Power of Attorney has been granted, the Court of Protection can appoint
a Deputy. This is usually a relative or close friend but a solicitor can be
appointed when there is no one else who is willing or able to act.

## What’s the difference between a Property and Affairs Deputy and a Personal Welfare Deputy? 

A deputy for property and affairs can make decisions about financial matters,
such as paying bills or buying services; whereas a personal welfare deputy can
make decisions about health and welfare matters; such as deciding where someone
lives and the care and treatment they receive.

It is rare for the court to appoint personal welfare deputies and it will only
do so in the most difficult cases. If there is a dispute about a health and
welfare decision the court will usually make the decision itself rather than
appoint a deputy to make the decision.

## Will the Deputy have to show their fitness to act? 

The court will require the proposed deputy to complete a deputy’s declaration
(COP4) to ensure they are financially sound and understand their
responsibilities as deputy. 

## How does the Court of Protection decide whether a Deputy should be appointed? 

The court will decide whether the person lacks capacity and what sort of
decisions the deputy will need to make. This will be set out in a court order. 

## What powers will a Deputy have? 

Only those which are set out in the court order. The deputy will usually be
allowed to: deal with any income, pay any debts, deal with any cash assets,
manage any property; make small gifts on special occasions such as birthdays,
deal with any capital assets, and make any investment decisions. 

## Does the Deputy have complete control over the person’s affairs? 

No, the deputy can only do what it says in the court order. They must also work
within the rules set out in the UK Mental Capacity Act 2005 and the UK Code of
Practice that accompanies this Act. 

## How long will it take? 

It can take 5 to 8 months for a deputy to be appointed. It can take even longer
if the court needs more information to decide the application. To avoid delay,
it is important that all of the forms are completed properly and the court is
given all the relevant information at the start. In very urgent cases, you can
ask the court to grant an interim order, for example to access funds to pay
debts. 

## How long will the deputy order last for? 

The court order will say how long the deputyship will last for. If the person
stops lacking capacity, then an application will have to be made to the Court of
Protection to discharge the deputy. If the person dies, the deputyship
automatically comes to an end.

## What is a security bond and why do I have to take one out?

The court requires that all deputies for property and financial affairs arrange
a security bond with an approved insurer Security is a type of insurance to
protect the person who lacks mental capacity in the unlikely event that the
deputy were to misappropriate their funds. The deputy must set up their security
before their appointment takes effect. The level of security is set by the
Court. The deputy is responsible for paying premiums from the funds of person
lacking capacity. 

## Are Deputies supervised? 

Deputies are supervised by the Office of the Public Guardian (OPG), and the
deputy must send a yearly report to the OPG explaining what decisions they have
made and accounting for the money they have spent. The deputy can instruct a
solicitor or accountant to prepare the annual report on their behalf. 

## Can a Deputy sell a person’s property? 

This will depend on what the court order
says, as many deputyship orders restrict the sale of property. The deputy may
need to make another application to the court for permission to sell the
property. If the property is jointly owned then a special new trustee
application will be needed. We can advise deputies on selling property and
whether they need to make another application to the Court of Protection. 

## Can the Court of Protection make a Will for someone or let gifts be made from the funds? 

Yes. In certain circumstances the court can make what is known as a statutory
Will or authorise gifts over and above those that the deputy can make. These are
however separate applications to the Deputyship application.

## Why can’t my next of kin make decisions for me? 

The phrase ‘next of kin’ is common but has no legal status in relation to
financial decisions. The only person able to manage your finances, if you lose
the capacity to do so for yourself, is a court-appointed deputy or attorney
acting under a registered lasting or enduring power of attorney.
